.\" Manpage for imgcli.
.\" Keep options in sync with `imgcli -h` and filters with `imgcli -filters`.
.TH IMGCLI 1 "2026-06-15" "imgcli 0.5.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
imgcli \- ffmpeg-style image conversion and processing in C
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B imgcli
.RB [ \-i
.IR INPUT ]...
.RB [ \-vf
.IR GRAPH ]
.RB [ \-q
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR FMT ]
.RB [ \-y | \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.I OUTPUT
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B imgcli
is a small, dependency-free command-line tool that converts, resizes, crops,
filters, and composites still images. It follows the same paradigm as
.BR ffmpeg (1):
decode the input, normalize it to a single common frame format (packed 8-bit
RGBA), run a comma-separated filtergraph, then encode by the output extension.
.PP
The default build links only the system C library; image codecs are compiled in
from the bundled public-domain stb and qoi single-header libraries. Built-in
formats are PNG, JPEG, BMP, TGA, GIF, PPM, and QOI.
.PP
.I OUTPUT
is a file path, or
.B \-
for standard output. When piping, the human-readable result line is written to
standard error so standard output carries only the encoded image bytes.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-i " INPUT"
An input file,
.B \-
for standard input, or a generator
.RB ( testsrc= WxH ,
.BI color= NAME:WxH ,
.BI gradient= WxH ,
.BI checker= WxH ).
Repeat
.B \-i
for compositing inputs: the first is the primary frame and the rest feed the
.B overlay
filter.
.TP
.BI \-vf " GRAPH"
The filtergraph, e.g.
.RB \(dq scale=800:-1,grayscale,gblur=2 \(dq.
See
.BR FILTERS .
.TP
.BI \-q " N"
JPEG quality, 1..100 (default 90).
.TP
.BI \-f " FMT"
Output format
.RB ( png / jpg / bmp / tga / ppm / qoi ).
Required when
.I OUTPUT
is
.B \-
(standard output); an optional override for files.
.TP
.B \-y
Overwrite the output if it exists.
.TP
.B \-n
Never overwrite the output.
.TP
.BI \-\-out\-dir " D"
Batch mode: write one output per input into directory
.IR D ,
keeping each basename and taking the extension from
.B \-f
or the input. Globs in
.B \-i
are expanded.
.TP
.B \-\-fail\-fast
In batch mode, stop at the first failing file instead of continuing.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit one machine-readable JSON result line (an array in batch mode).
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress the human-readable success line.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Validate the filtergraph and report the output dimensions; write nothing.
.TP
.B \-filters
List every filter. Add
.B \-\-json
for a machine-readable list.
.TP
.B \-info
Print the input dimensions and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print the version.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help.
.SH FILTERS
Filters chain with commas, e.g.
.RB \(dq scale=800:-1,grayscale,gblur=2 \(dq.
Run
.B imgcli \-filters
for the authoritative list. Highlights:
.TP
.BI scale= W:H [: nearest | bilinear | bicubic | lanczos ]
Resize; \-1 on a dimension keeps aspect ratio. bicubic/lanczos are
higher-quality resamplers; bilinear is the default.
.TP
.BI crop= W:H [: X:Y ]
Crop a region (centred by default).
.TP
.BI pad= W:H [: X:Y [: color ]]
Letterbox onto a larger canvas.
.TP
.BR hflip ", " vflip ", " transpose= 90|180|270 ", " rotate= DEG [: color ]
Mirror and rotate.
.TP
.BR grayscale ", " sepia ", " invert ", " brightness= V ", " contrast= V ", " saturation= V ", " gamma= V ", " hue= DEG ", " temperature= V ", " threshold= V
Tone and colour adjustments.
.TP
.BR blur= R ", " gblur= SIGMA ", " sharpen [= AMOUNT ] ", " edge ", " emboss ", " convolution= K [: DIV:BIAS ]
Convolution and edge filters.
.TP
.BI overlay= X:Y [: INDEX ]
Alpha-composite an additional
.B \-i
input. See also
.BR fill ", " drawbox .
.SH EXAMPLES
Convert, resize, and filter in one pass:
.PP
.RS
.EX
imgcli \-i photo.jpg \-vf "scale=1024:-1,grayscale,contrast=1.2,gblur=1.5" out.png
.EE
.RE
.PP
Make a thumbnail and write it as a high-quality WebP-free QOI:
.PP
.RS
.EX
imgcli \-i in.png \-vf "scale=256:-1:lanczos" thumb.qoi
.EE
.RE
.PP
Batch-resize a directory of JPEGs into PNG thumbnails:
.PP
.RS
.EX
imgcli \-i "shots/*.jpg" \-\-out\-dir thumbs \-vf "scale=400:-1" \-f png \-y
.EE
.RE
.PP
Pipe through stdin/stdout:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cat in.png | imgcli \-i \- \-vf grayscale \-f jpg \- > out.jpg
.EE
.RE
.PP
Probe an image as JSON without writing anything:
.PP
.RS
.EX
imgcli \-\-json \-info \-i photo.jpg
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
A runtime error (decode/encode failure, I/O error, or, in batch mode, at least
one file failed).
.TP
.B 2
A usage error (bad arguments or an invalid filtergraph).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR convert (1)
.PP
Project home: https://github.com/swperb/imgcli
.SH AUTHOR
Stephen Proctor and contributors.
